---
layout: post
title: "CS7641: Machine Learning"
date: 2025-01-04 00:00:00
categories: OMSCS CS7641
---

# CS7641 - Machine Learning

I started OMSCS with the CS7641 - Machine Learning course in Fall 2024 and I'm documenting my experience and learnings in this blog. 

## Disclaimer
This blog reflects my personal experience with the CS7641 course during the Fall 2024 semester. Please note that course content, assignments, and policies tend to change from semester to semester. For the most accurate and up-to-date information, always refer to the official course materials and consult with the current Teaching Assistants (TAs) and course staff. They are the best resources for any questions or doubts regarding the course.

## Preparation 
A few tools to familiarize yourself with before starting the course 
- Python + basic ML Libraries like Numpy, Pandas, Scikit-learn using any YouTube tutorial or free website. Also look at - [Software Toolbox for CS7641 Machine Learning](https://sites.gatech.edu/omscs7641/2024/02/07/software-toolbox-for-cs7641-machine-learning/).
- Calculus, statistics, and linear algebra concepts using online resources like Khan Academy. While these were not directly tested in the assignments/quizzes, having the background knowledge made understanding the papers/text much easier.
- Reading and writing research papers. For our cohort, all assignments had to be written in Overleaf.

## My experience 
I started the course with basic knowledge of the python libraries and math required and spent around 20-25 hours a week on the course work. A few things that helped me during this course were attending all the office hours, planning for a buffer of one week before submission deadline for each assignment and paying close attention to feedback and applying it to future assignments. Prior to this, I had taken an ML course in my under graduate studies and tried out some MOOC courses. CS7641 really stands out by pushing the student to not just implement the algorithms but also analyze why each algorithm behaves the way it does. The assignments force us to examine the effect of each hyperparameter, initialization value and random state on the algorithm. This coupled with the research papers, text and peer discussion gives us a solid understanding of the algorithms/concepts.

## Scores 
Each Assignment counted towards 15% of the final grade, the final exam counted for 30% and the quizzes counted for 5% each. I scored Quiz 1 (4.5/5), Quiz 2 (25/25), A1 (92/100), A2 (70/100), A3 (98/100), A4 (90/100), Final (46/57) and got an A. However, this distribution might vary from semester to semester.

## What could have gone better 
Out of the datasets I picked, Dataset 2 was a text dataset with 50k rows. Due to the time/resource constraints accompanying the assignments, I took a subset of my data for all the assignments. Looking back, I could have utilized a more powerful cloud VM to try out the experiments on the entire dataset for my learning. I also did not utilize any libraries like TensorFlow or leverage the GPU capabilities on my machine. This is something I plan to pick up in the upcoming months as I delve into more ML courses :)

## Logistics 
This was the only course I had taken in the semester, so the workload was manageable. I Used an AMD Ryzen 7 laptop with Windows 11 and 24GB RAM for all assignments. Colab or VM on cloud should also work. Just ensure that the code is reproducible on a baremetal linux environment. For Assignment 4 I had to move to a very specific setup to get my code working. Regarding AI - while the course staff do not discourage the use of AI, there is a very strict plagiarism policy in place. Students are encouraged to write the final report for each assignment by themselves. While AI can be used for things like code, editing, formatting, these need to be cited/attributed correctly in the submssion.

## Some resources I found useful 
- Initial Overview - https://nkapila.me/masters/cs7641-review
- Throughout the course - TA Blogs/FAQs/Ed discussion
- Latex Templates - https://github.com/knakamura13/cs7641-ml-study-materials-2023/tree/main
- Final Exam Revision - https://teapowered.dev/assets/ml-notes.pdf
- Final Exam Revision - https://bit-wrangler.github.io/cs7641-quiz-all/#/

## TL;DR

### A4 Environment Setup
For A4, I spent a lot of effort in setting up my development environment to be able to use the gymnasium library. Sharing the exact setup that worked for me in case it helps someone -

Linux VM on VMWare Player 17 - 22.04 LTS, 8GB RAM, 20GB Disk. 
Install VSCode from Software center.
Download miniconda installer.
```
 bash Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh 
 conda create -n myenv python=3.11 
 conda activate myenv 
 conda install jupyter 
 sudo apt install gcc 
 sudo apt install g++ 
 %pip install gymnasium 
 %pip install swig==4.2.1 
 %pip install "gymnasium[box2d]" 
 %pip install box2d box2d-kengz
```

Post this, I was able to run the experiment without rendering - 
```
env = gym.make("FrozenLake-v1", render_mode=None, is_slippery=True)
```
